### 问题1-4-26（员工持股计划相关问题的会计处理）

**问题：**

如下文背景资料介绍，上市公司实际控制人无偿赠与员工持股计划上市公司股份是否属于股份支付？

**背景：**

A公司于2014年12月公告了其员工持股计划，该计划出台背景是证监会于2014年6月20日公布了《关于上市公司实施员工持股计划试点的指导意见》（证监会公告〔2014〕33号）。该计划的核心内容是：

“……

员工持股计划的目的：……公司致力于让尽可能多的优秀员工持有公司的股份，力争在企业文化、创业机制、财富分享上创造决定性优势，最大程度上稳定员工团队，吸引行业内外优秀专才，激发员工永不止息的创业激情和工作潜能，全力推动公司在新时期战略转型目标的实现。

本员工持股计划的股票来源为本公司控股股东自然人B无偿赠与的A公司股票。自然人B计划向本员工持股计划无偿赠与XX万股A公司股票，约占A公司总股本的X%。

参与本员工持股计划的员工所持份额在股票过户到资产管理计划之日起一年内不得转让或兑现，满一年以后，每年可以转让或兑现其所持份额的25%，当年在限额内未转让或兑现的所持份额可以累计到下一年兑现。

本员工持股计划份额持有人需符合公司制定的标准，并经董事会确认、监事会核实。

当持有人出现被追究刑事责任、辞职、离职、因违反公司管理制度被开除处理、有损害公司利益情形的、从事竞业禁止行为等情况时，以事件发生之日为基准，其持有份额除到期未兑现部分外，剩余份额按照其取得成本由员工持股计划强制收回。

……”

自然人B实际向员工持股计划无偿赠与XX万股A公司股票，根据2014年9月1日收盘价XX元计算，用于无偿赠与的股票价值XX亿元。

**解答：**

从上文背景资料分析，无论对该计划的目的如何表述，对该计划的参与人（持有人）都是有特定身份要求的，即A公司的在职员工，且“本员工持股计划份额持有人需符合公司制定的标准，并经董事会确认、监事会核实”。因此，获取员工提供的服务是该计划的最根本目的。该计划中由实际控制人自然人B赠予该持股计划的股份仍满足《企业会计准则第11号——股份支付》及其应用指南和讲解规定的股份支付的定义和特征，故应按照股份支付处理。具体处理按照《企业会计准则解释第4号》第七条规定，A公司作为接受服务方但无结算义务，应作为权益结算的股份支付进行会计处理。

根据员工持股计划规定，“参与本员工持股计划的员工所持份额在股票过户到资产管理计划之日起一年内不得转让或兑现，满一年以后，每年可以转让或兑现其所持份额的25%，当年在限额内未转让或兑现的所持份额可以累计到下一年兑现”；“当持有人出现被追究刑事责任、辞职、离职、因违反公司管理制度被开除处理、有损害公司利益情形的、从事竞业禁止行为等情况时，以事件发生之日为基准，其持有份额除到期未兑现部分外，剩余份额按照其取得成本由员工持股计划强制收回”。这些规定表明该股份支付计划类似于一次授予、分期解锁的限制性股票激励计划，各期等待期分别为从授予日到各该期对应股份可转让日之间的期间，相关的股份支付费用应当在等待期内摊销，计入各期损益。

**结论基础：**

参考IFRS体系下《IFRS 2——以股份为基础的支付》第13A段：

In particular, if the identifiable consideration received (if any) by the entity
appears to be less than the fair value of the equity instruments granted or
liability incurred, typically this situation indicates that other consideration
(ie unidentifiable goods or services) has been (or will be) received by the
entity. The entity shall measure the identifiable goods or services received in
accordance with this IFRS. The entity shall measure the unidentifiable goods or
services received (or to be received) as the difference between the fair value
of the share-based payment and the fair value of any identifiable goods or
services received (or to be received). The entity shall measure the
unidentifiable goods or services received at the grant date. However, for
cash-settled transactions, the liability shall be remeasured at the end of each
reporting period until it is settled in accordance with paragraphs 30–33.

中文译文：特别是，如果实体收到的可辨认对价（如有）看似低于所授予的权益工具或所承担的负债的公允价值，则通常这一情况表明实体已经（或者将要）收到其他对价（即不可辨认的货物或服务）。实体应根据本准则的规定对所收到的可辨认的货物或服务进行计量。实体应按照以下两者之间的差额计量已经（或者将要）收到的不可辨认货物或服务：（1）股份支付的公允价值；（2）已经（或者将要）收到的可辨认货物或服务的公允价值。实体应在授予日对已收到的不可辨认货物或服务进行计量。但是，对于现金结算的股份支付，应在每一报告期末根据本准则第30～33段对相关负债进行计量，直到其被结算。

根据我们对IFRS体系下相关技术资料的研究结果，我们发现在IFRS下，此类范围较广的员工持股计划也应属于IFRS
2的规范范围。正如IFRS 2的“结论基础”部分的BC8～BC18段所指出：

**Broad-based employee share plans, including employee share purchase plans**

BC8 Some employee share plans are described as 'broad-based' or 'all-employee'
plans, in which all (or virtually all) employees have the opportunity to
participate, whereas other plans are more selective, covering individual or
specific groups of employees (eg senior executives). Employee share purchase
plans are often broad-based plans. Typically, employee share purchase plans
provide employees with an opportunity to buy a specific number of shares at a
discounted price, ie at an amount that is less than the fair value of the
shares. The employee's entitlement to discounted shares is usually conditional
upon specific conditions being satisfied, such as remaining in the service of
the entity for a specified period.

（广义基础的雇员股份计划，包括雇员股份购买计划

8．一些雇员股份计划被描述成“广义基础”或“全部雇员”计划，在这种计划中，全部（或几乎全部）雇员都有机会参与，而其他计划更具有选择性，只涵盖了个人或特定雇员团体（例如，高级行政人员）。雇员股份购买计划经常是广义基础上的计划。雇员股份购买计划一般提供雇员以折价，即低于股份公允价值的金额购买特定数量股份的机会。雇员是否享有购买折价股份的权利经常取决于是否满足特定的条件，比如在主体中服务一个特定的时期。）

BC9 The issues that arise with respect to employee share purchase plans are:

(a) are these plans somehow so different from other employee share plans that a
different accounting treatment is appropriate?

(b) even if the answer to the above question is 'no', are there circumstances,
such as when the discount is very small, when it is appropriate to exempt
employee share purchase plans from an accounting standard on share-based
payment?

（9．与雇员股份购买计划相关的问题有：

(1)这些计划是否与其他雇员股份计划非常不同，以至于采用一种不同的会计处理是合适的？

(2)即使对上面问题的回答是“否”，是否存在这样的情况，比如当折价很小时，雇员股份购买计划豁免采用以股份为基础的支付的会计准则是合适的？）

BC10 Some respondents to ED 2 argued that broad-based employee share plans
should be exempt from an accounting standard on share-based payment. The reason
usually given was that these plans are different from other types of employee
share plans and, in particular, are not a part of remuneration for employee
services. Some argued that requiring the recognition of an expense in respect of
these types of plans was perceived to be contrary to government policy to
encourage employee share ownership. In contrast, other respondents saw no
difference between employee share purchase plans and other employee share plans,
and argued that the same accounting requirements should therefore apply.
However, some suggested that there should be an exemption if the discount is
small.

（10．《征求意见稿第2号》的一些反馈意见者认为，广义基础的雇员股份计划应豁免采用以股份为基础的支付的会计准则。常见的理由是这些计划和其他类型的雇员股份计划不同，而且特别是其并不是对雇员提供服务的薪酬的一部分。一些人认为，要求就这些类型的计划确认费用是和政府鼓励雇员拥有股份的政策相悖的。与之相对的是，其他反馈意见者认为雇员股份购买计划和其他雇员股份计划并无二致，并因此认为他们适用相同的会计要求。然而，一些人建议当折价较小时，可以允许豁免。）

BC11 **The Board concluded that, in principle, there is no reason to treat
broad-based employee share plans, including broad-based employee share purchase
plans, differently from other employee share plans** (the issue of 'small'
discounts is considered later). The Board noted that the fact that these schemes
are available only to employees is in itself sufficient to conclude that the
benefits provided represent employee remuneration. Moreover, the term
'remuneration' is not limited to remuneration provided as part of an individual
employee's contract: it encompasses all benefits provided to employees.
Similarly, the term services encompasses all benefits provided by the employees
in return, including increased productivity, commitment or other enhancements in
employee work performance as a result of the incentives provided by the share
plan.

（11.**理事会得出结论，原则上，没有理由认为包括广义基础的雇员股份购买计划在内的广义基础雇员股份计划的处理和其他雇员股份计划有所不同**（折扣“较小”的问题在下文中考虑）。理事会指出，这些计划只有雇员才能取得的这一事实本身就足以证明，提供给雇员的利益代表了雇员薪酬。不仅如此，“薪酬”这个术语并不只是局限于作为雇员个人合同一部分的薪酬：它包括提供给雇员的全部利益。类似地，服务这个术语包括雇员提供的作为回报的全部利益，包括由于股份计划的激励而增加的生产力和责任感或雇员其他工作业绩的提高。）

BC12 Moreover, **distinguishing regular employee services from the additional
benefits received from broad-based employee share plans would not change the
conclusion that it is necessary to account for such plans.** No matter what
label is placed on the benefits provided by employees—or the benefits provided
by the entity—the transaction should be recognised in the financial statements.

（12.并且，**将普通的雇员服务从广义基础的雇员股份计划带来的额外收益中区分出来，并不会改变需要对这种计划进行会计处理的结论**。不管雇员提供的利益或主体提供的利益被作何分类，这项交易必须在财务报表中确认。）

BC13 Furthermore, that **governments in some countries have a policy of
encouraging employee share ownership is not a valid reason for according these
types of plans a different accounting treatment, because it is not the role of
financial reporting to give favourable accounting treatment to particular
transactions to encourage entities to enter into them.** For example,
governments might wish to encourage entities to provide pensions to their
employees, to lessen the future burden on the state, but that does not mean that
pension costs should be excluded from the financial statements. To do so would
impair the quality of financial reporting. The purpose of financial reporting is
to provide information to users of financial statements, to assist them in
making economic decisions. **The omission of expenses from the financial
statements does not change the fact that those expenses have been incurred. The
omission of expenses causes reported profits to be overstated and hence the
financial statements are not neutral, are less transparent and comparable, and
are potentially misleading to users.**

（13.此外，**一些国家的政府采取的鼓励雇员拥有股份的政策并不能作为对这些类型的计划采用不同的会计处理的正当理由，因为给予特定交易以有利的会计处理方法来鼓励主体采用这种交易不是财务报告的任务。**比如，政府可能希望鼓励主体对他们的雇员提供养老金，以减轻国家的未来负担，但这并不意味着养老金成本可以不在财务报表中列示。这种做法会损害财务报告的质量。财务报告的目的是向财务报表的使用者提供信息，帮助他们作出经济决策。**省略财务报表中的费用并不会改变这些费用既已发生的事实。费用的省略导致报告利润的虚增，使财务报表不再是中立的，透明度和可比性降低，对使用者具有潜在的误导作用。）**

BC14 There remains the question whether there should be an exemption for some
plans, when the discount is small. For example, FASB Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards No.123 Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation contains an
exemption for employee share purchase plans that meet specified criteria, of
which one is that the discount is small.

（14.当折价较小时，一些股份计划是否允许豁免是值得商榷的。例如，美国财务会计准则委员会的《财务会计准则公告第123号—以股票为基础的报酬的会计处理》就允许雇员股份购买计划在满足特定标准时豁免，其中一项标准即为折价较小。）

BC15 On the one hand, it seems reasonable to exempt an employee share purchase
plan if it has substantially no option features and the discount is small. In
such situations, the rights given to the employees under the plan probably do
not have a significant value, from the entity's perspective.

（15.一方面，如果它实质上没有期权特征并且折价较小时，将雇员股份购买计划作为例外似乎是有道理的。在这样的情况下，计划授予雇员的权利从主体的角度来看很可能没有明显的价值。）

BC16 On the other hand, **even if one accepts that an exemption is appropriate,
specifying its scope is problematic**, eg deciding what constitutes a small
discount. Some argue that a 5 per cent discount from the market price (as
specified in SFAS 123) is too high, noting that a block of shares can be sold on
the market at a price close to the current share price. Furthermore, it could be
argued that it is unnecessary to exempt these plans from the standard. If the
rights given to the employees do not have a significant value, this suggests
that the amounts involved are immaterial. Because it is not necessary to include
immaterial information in the financial statements, there is no need for a
specific exclusion in an accounting standard.

（16.另一方面，**即使同意豁免是合适的，规定它的范围也不容易**，例如，决定什么算是一个较小折扣。有人认为在市场价格的基础上打5%的折扣（按照《财务会计准则公告第123号》的规定）太高了，因为作为一体出售的股份能在市场上以接近现行股价的价格出售。此外，说没有必要把这些股份计划从准则中豁免也是可以的.如果授予雇员的权利缺乏明显的价值，这表明所影响的金额是不重要的。因为没有必要将不重要的信息包括在财务报表中，所以在会计准则中没有必要做一个特定的例外排除。）

BC17 **For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the Board concluded
that broad-based employee share plans, including broad-based employee share
purchase plans, should not be exempted from the IFRS.**

**（17.出于对前面段落给出原因的考虑，理事会得出结论，广义基础的雇员股份计划，包括广义基础的雇员股份购买计划，不能在国际财务报告准则中豁免。）**

BC18 However, the Board noted that there might be instances when an entity
engages in a transaction with an employee in his/her capacity as a holder of
equity instruments, rather than in his/her capacity as an employee. For example,
an entity might grant all holders of a particular class of its equity
instruments the right to acquire additional equity instruments of the entity at
a price that is less than the fair value of those equity instruments. If an
employee receives such a right because he/she is a holder of that particular
class of equity instruments, the Board concluded that the granting or exercise
of that right should not be subject to the requirements of the IFRS, because the
employee has received that right in his/her capacity as a shareholder, rather
than as an employee.

（18.然而，理事会注意到可能出现主体和雇员发生交易的情形，此时雇员以权益性工具的持有者而不是雇员的身份进行交易。例如，一个主体可能会授予其某种特定类别权益性工具所有的持有者以低于那些权益性工具公允价值的价格购买主体额外的权益性工具的权利。理事会得出结论，如果雇员是因为其属于这一特定类别权益性工具的持有者而获得这样的权利，授予或行使那种权利将不受本国际财务报告准则要求的影响，原因是雇员获得权利的身份是一名股东而不是一名雇员。）

即，此类涉及面较广的员工持股计划也同样属于IFRS
2的规范范围，不应因为政府经济政策考量等非技术因素影响而不确认股份支付相关费用。